Abstract:

    No known study has identified the specific mechanism of sign epistatic
fitness reversal and its prevailing effect in a population that undergoes
recombination. A significant amount of research has been conducted
investigating sign epistasis and the role of deleterious mutations in asexual
populations. This research has shown that deleterious mutations are critical in
rapid transversal of valleys in the fitness landscape. This process involving
deleterious mutations is generally described as a fitness reversal, where a
deleterious mutation is compensated by a separate mutation. This reversal leads
into sign epistasis when together the two mutations achieve a higher fitness
than either would separately. Literature comparing sign epistasis between
sexual and asexual populations suggests that sign epistasis occurs with both
reproductive strategies, but that recombination leads to subtly different
effects. On a generational scale, recombination seems to hinder the individual
chance of fitness reversal, but when considered across a large population over
time, recombination does not prevent escape to higher local fitness maxima.
Furthermore, recombination has not shown to confer any particular advantage
when compared to asexual reproduction.

    These studies consider the fitness of the population as a whole, however,
the entire population will not survive and reproduce under natural selection.
The fittest (or dominant) genotypes will reproduce more successfully and will
lead to a bias of those genes in future generations. Thus, the dominant
genotypes drive the vehicle of evolution. I hope to extend previous research
mentioned by investigating the mechanism of sign epistasis and its influence
the evolution of the dominant genotype of an sexual population. In illustrating
the step-by-step fitness reversal of deleterious mutations, I expect to
demonstrate that recombination brings together sign epistatic mutations that
produce a large gain in fitness. I hypothesize that recombination that fitness
reversals is significantly involved in the lineage of the final dominant
genotype, and therefore, provides a benefit in the evolution of sexually
reproducing populations.

Background:

    The scientific literature selected for this paper were chosen based on
their establishment and support of sign epistasis as a central conduit in
navigating the fitness landscape. Each of the three papers highlights different
variables that influence the outcome of sign epistasis. The first paper, by
Matthew Cowperthwaite et al. (From Bad To Good), establish evidence that
deleterious mutations are persistent enough and complementary mutations
prevalent enough to allow for frequent fitness reversals. Daniel Weinreich et
al. (Rapid Evolutionary Escape) describes how the disruptive effect of
recombination on sign epistasis is inversely proportional to population size,
and than for large population sizes, recombination does not seem to show any
significant effect. Finally, research by Arjan de Visser et al. (Exploring the
Effect of Sex) give indication that effectiveness of sign epistasis with
recombination is dependent on the given fitness landscape. 

    According to the evolution model of Strong Selection, Weak Mutation (SSWM),
deleterious mutations introduced to a population are rapidly selected for and
removed. Cowperthwaite et al. clearly demonstrate this is not the case and give
evidence that deleterious mutations are not immediately removed from the
population. At initial stages, they claim, both deleterious and beneficial
mutations occur at similar rates. Since deleterious mutations are frequent and
prevalent, it is more likely that a complementary mutation may occur before the
genotype is selected out, producing a fitness reversal. Furthermore, they
present evidence of a relationship between fitness and the number of
deleterious mutations. As mutation rate increases, up to a point, the number of
deleterious mutations and the mean fitness level both increase. This may
suggest that a high number of deleterious mutations allows for frequent and
highly beneficial fitness reversals. However, correlation is not causation; the
authors lack evidence to verify this claim. The experimental process could not
determine whether fitness was produced by by true sign epistatic fitness
reversal. Furthermore, all epistatic effects can occur simultaneously, and
there was no isolated analysis of each factor that can produce a fitness
increase.

    Research by Daniel Weinreich et al. provide excellent predictive models of
fixation of deleterious and beneficial mutations in epistatic states, both for
intermediate fixation stages (before a fitness reversal) and the total
fixation. Based on their models and predictions, they find it unlikely that
recombination provides a higher rate of local maxima traversal. However, they
do admit that, in large populations, it is likely that recombination may be
able to quickly bring about a fitness reversal if two genotypes, each with the
sign epistatic allele, reproduce. This shows that, when compared to asexual
reproduction, sexual reproduction approaches fitness valleys slower, but
reaches fitness peaks quicker. This simultaneous fixation may other advantages,
such as being able to reproduce with neighbor genotypes and provide whichever
missing allele need to create a fitness reversal in the offspring. However,
this paper did not investigate this possibility.

    The paper authored by de Visser et al. provides a direct comparison between
the role of sign epistasis in sexual and asexual reproduction. By constructing
the fitness landscape of an actual asexual fungus and then using a clever
simulation to use the same constraints and fitness landscape for a sexual
population, the researchers were able to analogously compare the evolution of
each population. They discovered that the adaptation of the sexual population
was dependent on the topography of the fitness landscape. Similar to Weinreich
et al., they also found evidence that sex can take very quick, large "jumps"
across the fitness landscape when simultaneous fixation occurs, but it
generally took sexual populations longer to reach the intermediate stages.
However, as they admit in their discussion, they expected much more rapid
evolution in sexually reproducing individuals, as in nature. There may be more
evidence within the mechanics of evolution and sign epistasis which was not
investigated.

Proposal:

    While the aforementioned studies studied the effects of sign epistasis on
the population a whole, I desire to look at the specific mechanics of the
process that lead to sign epistatic fitness reversals. This will provide me
with insight out of reach for many of the studies, because it will allow me to
follow the exact process of evolution, step-by-step, and to "play God" and see
the effect of reversing any particular step. My experiment will be accomplished
through the following generalized steps: 1) by using the digital evolution
program Avida to produce many large data sets of evolved genotypes and all
their intermediate steps; 2) by tracing the lineage of the final dominant
genotype and testing to see the effect of deleterious mutations through time;
and 3) by making statistical tests to determine whether recombination is
involved significantly in the evolution of the final dominant genotype.

    Avida does not provide the functionality to trace lineages through a sexual
population, nor does it provide the ability to analyze the effect of
deleterious mutations in a lineage. Thus, much of my effort has gone into
writing custom software to analyze the large data sets produced by Avida. I
began by constructing a data structure to represent the massive data produced
by Avida. In a typical run of Avida with 100 thousand update cycles, well over
120 million unique genotypes are written to output. This presented a huge
challenge in terms of being able to efficiently store a representation of the
data. By using a hash map, I was able to store all necessary data and access
records in linear time, albeit with a large memory requirement. I then moved
onto the task of selecting the lineage of any particular genome, both for a
line of descent and line of ancestry. A lineage from line of descent provides
me with all offspring, allowing me to trace that path of a deleterious mutation
that arises in a genome and is passed on to offspring. The lineage selected
from the line of ancestry provides the exclusion of all genomes that are not
ancestors to the final dominant genotype. The combination of these two tracing
methods will allow me to sequentially analyze paths of inherited deleterious
mutations, starting from the final dominant genotype and working backwards. 

    Currently, I am finishing up on writing software module that will test each
genome to determine whether it has a deleterious mutation, whether that
deleterious mutation is inherited in offspring, and whether that mutation ever
changes sign. This process of testing the deleterious mutation in offspring
will iterate through each generation until the mutation is lost through
recombination, overwritten by another mutation, or compensated for by
epistasis. In the most latter case, I will test whether the originally
deleterious mutation is required for that level of fitness. I will write a
module that will revert the mutation to its previous state and compare the
fitness between the mutated and reverted genotypes. If this test shows that the
deleterious mutation was required for that degree of fitness, I will then
determine by which route (random mutation or cross-over) either the deleterious
or complementary mutation was introduced. From this point, I should have all
the tools I need to put together statistical methods to test my hypothesis that
the fitness of the final dominant genotype was influenced by fitness reversals
introduced by recombination. And it is at the beginning of this point that I
desire to reach by the end of the semester.

Sources: Cowperthwaite, M.C., J.J. Bull, L.A. Meyers. 2006. From bad to good:
fitness reversals and the ascent of deleterious mutations. PLoS Comput Biol
2(10):e141

de Visser, J.A.G.M, S. Park, and J. Krug. 2009. Exploring the effect of sex on
empirical fitness landscapes. The American Naturalist 174:S15-S30

Weinrecih, D.M., and L. Choa. 2005. Rapid evolutionary escape by large
populations from local fitness peaks is likely in nature. Evolution
59(6):1175-1182
